




% CLT Explained
----

Only the present moment is immediately experienced by people.
experiences of the past, present, other locations, people, and alternate realities are psychologically impossible.
Nevertheless, our thoughts, feelings, plans, forecasts, hopes, and counterfactual alternatives fill our minds, shape our decisions, and direct our behavior.
How do we get beyond the present to take into account distant entities?
How do we make long-term plans, consider other people's perspectives, and account for speculative alternatives to reality? 

According to the Construal Level Theory (CLT), humans can accomplish this by creating abstract mental construals of distant objects.
Thus, despite the fact that we are unable to experience that which is not present, we are nonetheless able to foresee the future, recall the past, speculate about what may have been, and recall the reactions of others.
Memory, hypothesis, and predictions are all mental constructs that aren't based on actual experience.
They symbolize psychologically remote items and help us see beyond the current circumstances.
A person's subjective perception of something's proximity to or distance from them in the present moment is known as psychological distance.
Thus, psychological distance is egocentric: Its focal point is the present-tense self, and the various ways in which an object could be distanced from that point—in terms of time, location, or social distance—constitute several degrees of psychological distance 
there is marked commonality in the way people respond to the different distance dimensions.



Thus, according to CLT,  people overcome different psychological distances by using similar mental construction processes.

-------

responding to an event that is increasingly distant on any of those dimensions requires relying more on mental construal and less on direct experience of the event.




 Past research has typically investigated the different distance dimensions within disparate theoretical frameworks and methodologies. 

 The turning points of human evolution include developing tools, which required planning for the future;

making function-specific tools, which required considering hypothetical alternatives;

developing consciousness, which enabled the recognition of distance and perspective taking;

developing language, which enabled forming larger and more complex social groups and relations; and domestication of animals and plants, which required an extended temporal perspective (Flinn, Geary, & Ward, 2005). Human history is associated with expanding horizons: traversing greater spatial distances (e.g., discovering new continents, space travel), forming larger social groups (families vs. Human development in the first years of life involves acquiring the ability to plan for the more distant future, consider possibilities that are nonpresent, relate to and take the perspective of more distant people (from self-centeredness to acknowledging others, from immediate social environment to larger social groups; Suddendorf & Corballis, 2007). Although the areas of evolution, history, and child development have different time scales, research in these domains seems to converge on the notion that transcending the present requires and is enabled by the human capacity for abstract mental representation. We hope that the present research on psychological distance, its relationship to level of construal, and its consequences for thought, feeling, and action advances our understanding of how individuals and groups transcend the here and now.
